Introduction to Che 7 (#703)
codenvy/che-docs: src/main/pages/che-7/overview/assembly_introduction-to-eclipse-che.adoc

[id='introduction-to-eclipse-che_{context}']
= Introduction to Eclipse Che
:context: introduction-to-eclipse-che

> Eclipse Che is a Kubernetes native IDE and developer collaboration platform. It provides: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eclipse Che is a Kubernetes-native IDE and developer collaboration platform. It provides: 
```

* Centralized developer environments running on Kubernetes.  

> * Multi-container workspaces for each developer that can be replicated with a single click through Eclipse Che Factories.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Multi-container workspaces for each developer that can be replicated with a single click through Eclipse Che 
factories.  
```

* Pre-built stacks with the ability to create custom stacks for any language or runtime.  
* Enterprise integration via Keycloak for AD/LDAP.  

> * Browser-based IDEs, integration Eclipse Theia or any other web IDE (like Jupyter).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Browser-based IDEs; integration with Che-Theia or any other web IDE (like Jupyter).  
```

> * Support of most recent tooling protocol: Language Server Protocol, Debug Adapter Protocol.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support of most recent tooling protocols: Language Server Protocol, Debug Adapter Protocol.  
```

> * Plugins mechanism with compatibility of VSCode extensions.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Plug-in mechanism compatible with Visual Studio Code extensions.  
```

* An SDK for creating custom cloud developer platforms.  

[id="getting-started-with-che"]
== Getting started with Che

> You can get started with Eclipse Che by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Get started with Eclipse Che by:
```

> * Following the link:quick-start.html[quick start guide] to get Eclipse Che installed locally on your computer,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Following the link:quick-start.html[quick-start guide] to get Eclipse Che installed locally on your computer.
```

> * Learning more about Eclipse Che: link:what-is-che.html[What is Eclipse Che], link:architecture-overview.html[Architecture Overview], link:che-features-and-benefits.html[Features and Benefits]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Learning more about Eclipse Che: link:what-is-che.html[What is Eclipse Che], link:architecture-overview.html[Architecture Overview], link:che-features-and-benefits.html[Features and Benefits].
```

> * Discovering Eclipse Che capabilities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Discovering Eclipse Che capabilities.
```

> == Join the Community

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Joining the community
```

> Interested to join the community? Join us on the following channels:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interested in joining the community? Join us on the following channels:
```

> * **Public Chat:** Join the public link:https://mattermost.eclipse.org/eclipse/channels/eclipse-che[Eclipse Che Mattermost] channel to discuss with us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Public chat:* Join the public link:https://mattermost.eclipse.org/eclipse/channels/eclipse-che[Eclipse Che Mattermost] channel to chat with the developers.
```

> * **GitHub Project Repositories:** Report bugs, feature request and contribute on link:https://github.com/eclipse/che[Eclipse Che Main Repository], improve documentation on link:https://github.com/eclipse/che-docs[Eclipse Che Docs Repo].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *GitHub project repositories:* Report bugs, request features, and contribute in the main link:https://github.com/eclipse/che[Eclipse Che repository]. Improve documentation in the link:https://github.com/eclipse/che-docs[Eclipse Che docs repository].
```

> * **Support:** StackOverflow to help other users of Eclipse Che: link:https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/eclipse-che[Eclipse Che on StackOverflow].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Support:* Visit StackOverflow to help other users of Eclipse Che: link:https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/eclipse-che[Eclipse Che on StackOverflow].
```

> * **Community Blog:** Learn about the latest of Eclipse Che and submit your blog posts to link:https://medium.com/eclipse-che-blog[Eclipse Che Blog].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Community blog:* Learn about the latest of Eclipse Che and submit your blog posts to the link:https://medium.com/eclipse-che-blog[Eclipse Che blog].
```

> * **Weekly Meetings:** Join us in our link:https://github.com/eclipse/che/wiki/Che-Dev-Meetings[Che Community Meeting] every second monday.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Bi-weekly meetings:* Join us in our link:https://github.com/eclipse/che/wiki/Che-Dev-Meetings[Che community meeting] every second Monday.
```

> * **Roadmap:** We maintain the link:https://github.com/eclipse/che/wiki/Roadmap[Roadmap] on the wiki.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Roadmap:* See the development link:https://github.com/eclipse/che/wiki/Roadmap[roadmap] on the wiki.
```

== What is Eclipse Che

> Eclipse Che is a Kubernetes native IDE and developer collaboration platform. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eclipse Che is a Kubernetes-native IDE and developer collaboration platform. 
```

> As an open source project, the core values of Eclipse Che are to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an open-source project, the core goals of Eclipse Che are to:
```

> * **Accelerate project and developer onboarding:** As a zero-install development environment that runs in your browser, Eclipse Che makes it easy for someone to join your team and contribute to a project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Accelerate project and developer onboarding:* As a zero-install development environment that runs in your browser, Eclipse Che makes it easy for anyone to join your team and contribute to a project.
```

> * **Remove inconsistency between developer environments:** No more: “but it works on my machine….” Your code works exactly the same way in everyone’s environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Remove inconsistency between developer environments:** No more: “But it works on my machine.” Your code works exactly the same way in everyone’s environment.
```

> * **Provide built-in security and enterprise readiness:** As Eclipse Che becomes a viable replacement for VDI solutions, it must be secure and it must support enterprise requirements such as role-based access control and the ability to remove all source code from developer machines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Provide built-in security and enterprise readiness:* As Eclipse Che becomes a viable replacement for VDI solutions, it must be secure and it must support enterprise requirements, such as role-based access control and the ability to remove all source code from developer machines.
```

> To deliver those core values, Eclipse Che provides:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To achieve those core goals, Eclipse Che provides:
```

> * **Workspaces:** Container based developer workspaces providing all the tools and the dependencies needed to code, build, test, run and debug applications. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Workspaces:* Container-based developer workspaces providing all the tools and dependencies needed to code, build, test, run, and debug applications. 
```

> * **Browser based IDEs:** Bundled browser-based IDEs with language tooling, debuggers, terminal, VCS integration and much more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Browser-based IDEs:* Bundled browser-based IDEs with language tooling, debuggers, terminal, VCS integration, and much more.
```

> * **Extensible platform:** Bring your own IDE. Define, configure and extend the tools that you need for your application by using Plug-ins. Compatible with VSCode extensions.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Extensible platform:* Bring your own IDE. Define, configure, and extend the tools that you need for your application by using plug-ins, which are compatible with Visual Studio Code extensions.  
```

> * **Enterprise Integration:** Multi-user capabilities, includes Keycloak for authentication and integration with LDAP/AD. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Enterprise Integration:* Multi-user capabilities, including Keycloak for authentication and integration with LDAP or AD. 
```

> === Workspace Model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Workspace model
```

> Che defines the workspace to be the project code files and all of their dependencies necessary to edit, build, run, and debug them. In our world, we treat the IDE and the development runtime as a dependency of the workspace. These items are embedded and included with the workspace, whereever it may run. This compares to classic workspace definitions which may include the project code, but require the developer to bind their IDE and use their laptop localhost to provide a runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Che defines the workspace to be the project code files and all of their dependencies necessary to edit, build, run, and debug them. Che treats the IDE and the development runtime as dependencies of the workspace. These items are embedded and always included with the workspace. This differentiates Che from classical workspace definitions, which may include the project code, but require the developer to bind their IDE to their workstation and use it to provide a runtime locally.
```

> Each workspace is isolated from one another and is responsible for managing the lifecycle of the components that are contained within it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Workspaces are isolated from one another and are responsible for managing the lifecycle of their components.
```

> Developers using Eclipse Che use their containers directly in their developer workspaces. **Che workspaces are kubernetes pods which allow to replicate the application runtimes (and its microservices) used in production** and provide a “dev mode” layer on top of those, adding intellisense and IDE toolings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developers using Eclipse Che use their containers directly in their developer workspaces. *Che workspaces are Kubernetes pods, which allow to replicate the application runtimes (and its microservices) used in production* and provide a “dev mode” layer on top of those, adding intellisense and IDE toolings.
```

> === Browser based IDEs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Browser-based IDEs
```

> Eclipse Che provides browser based IDEs for its workspaces. The default browser based IDE is built on link:https://github.com/theia-ide/theia[Eclipse Theia], with the following capabilities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eclipse Che provides browser-based IDEs for its workspaces. The default IDE is built on link:https://github.com/theia-ide/theia[Theia], and it has the following capabilities:
```

> * **Monaco based editor:** Fast and responsive editor, codelens and much more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Monaco-based editor:* Fast and responsive editor, codelens, and much more.
```

> * **Language Server Protocol:** Get languague tooling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Language Server Protocol:** Language tooling.
```

> * **Debug Adapter Protocol:** Get debugger tooling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Debug Adapter Protocol:* Debugger tooling.
```

> * **Command Palette:** Do everything from your keyboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Command palette:* Do everything from your keyboard.
```

> * **Task Support:** Tasks from VS Code are extended and support Che Commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Task support:* Tasks from Visual Studio Code are extended and support Che commands.
```

> * **Embedded Preview:** Preview your application directly from the IDE, including Markdown preview.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Embedded preview:* Preview your application directly from the IDE, including Markdown preview.
```

> * **Customizable layout:** Adapt the layout using drag and drop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Customizable layout:* Adapt the layout using drag and drop.
```

> * **And much more:** Outline View, Search, Git.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *And more:* Outline view, search, Git.
```

> **Different IDEs for different use cases**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Different IDEs for different use cases
```

> In Eclipse Che, the IDE is completely decoupled so that it is possible to plug a different IDE into a Che workspaces:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Eclipse Che, the IDE is completely decoupled, so that it is possible to plug a different IDE into Che workspaces:
```

> * It can be based on Eclipse Theia (as it is a framework to build a web IDE), such as the popular Sirius on the web:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* It can be based on Eclipse Theia (as it is a framework to build a web IDE), such as the popular Sirius:
+
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

video::B6aCqywKpyY[youtube]

> * Or it can be a completely different solutions, like Jupyter or Eclipse Dirigible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* It can be a completely different solution, such as Jupyter or Eclipse Dirigible:
+
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

video::VooNzKxRFgw[youtube]

> There are a different situations where the default IDE will not cover the use cases of your audience, or you might have stakeholders who are using a dedicated tool that covers their needs instead of using an IDE. In the traditional Eclipse IDE world, that was done with RCP applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a different situations where the default IDE does not cover the use cases of your audience, or you might have stakeholders who use a dedicated tool that covers their needs instead of an IDE. In the traditional Eclipse IDE world, that was done with Rich Client Platform (RCP) applications.
```

=== Extensible Platform

> Eclipse Che is a great platform to build cloud-native tools and it provides a strong extensibility model with an enjoyable developer experience for contributors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eclipse Che is a great platform to build cloud-native tools, and it provides a strong extensibility model with an enjoyable developer experience for contributors.
```

Eclipse Che is extensible in different ways:

> * **Plug-ins:** to add capabilities to the IDE. Rely on APIs compatible with Visual Studio Code. Plug-ins are isolated and provide their own dependencies packaged in containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Plug-ins* to add capabilities to the IDE. Che-Theia plug-ins rely on APIs compatible with Visual Studio Code. Plug-ins are isolated and provide their own dependencies packaged in containers.
```

> * **Stacks:** to create pre-configured Che workspaces with dedicated set of tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Stacks* to create pre-configured Che workspaces with a dedicated set of tools.
```

> * **Alternate IDEs:** to provide specialized tooling within Eclipse Che. Build your own, based on Eclipse Theia, or pick existing ones like Jupyter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Alternative IDEs* to provide specialized tooling within Eclipse Che. Build your own, based on Eclipse Theia, or pick existing ones like Jupyter.
```

> * **Marketplace (soon)** to easily distribute tools and custom IDEs to users and communities which can be tried online

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Marketplace (soon)* to easily distribute tools and custom IDEs, which can be tried online, to users and communities.
```

> As introduced earlier, Eclipse Che use Eclipse Theia as its default browser-based IDE. Eclipse Theia is providing a framework to build web IDEs. It is built in TypeScript and gives contributors a programming model that is flexible, relies on state-of-the-art tooling protocols and makes it faster to build new tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eclipse Che uses Che-Theia as its default browser-based IDE. Theia provides a framework to build web IDEs. It is built in TypeScript and gives contributors a programming model that is flexible, relies on state-of-the-art tooling protocols, and makes it faster to build new tools.
```

> In Eclipse Che, a user doesn't need to worry about the dependencies needed for the tools running in their workspace — they should just be available when needed. This means that a Che plugin provides its dependencies, its back-end services (which could be running in a sidecar container connected to the user’s workspace), and the IDE UI extension. By packaging all these elements together, the user is free from having to configure many different tools all together. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Eclipse Che, a user does not need to worry about dependencies needed for the tools running in their workspace—they are available when needed. This means that a Che-Theia plug-in provides its dependencies, its back-end services (which could be running in a sidecar container connected to the user’s workspace), and the IDE UI extension. By packaging all these elements together, Che frees the user from having to configure many different tools together. 
```

> **VSCode Extensibility Compatibility**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Visual Studio Code extension compatibility
```

> There is one important aspect of the plugin model — Eclipse Che allows to rationalize the effort for a contributor who is willing to build a plugin and distribute in to different developer communities and tools. For that purpose, Eclipse Che added  into Eclipse Theia plugins API to allow compatibility with the extension points from VS Code. As result, it becomes much easier to bring an existing plugin from VS Code onto Eclipse Che. The main difference is in the way the plugins are packaged. On Eclipse Che, the plugins are delivered with their own dependencies in their own container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eclipse Che allows to rationalize the effort for a contributor who is willing to build a plug-in and distribute it to different developer communities and tools. For that purpose, Eclipse Che features a plug-in API compatible with extension points from Visual Studio Code. As a result, it is easy to bring an existing plug-in from Visual Studio Code into Eclipse Che. The main difference is in the way the plug-ins are packaged. On Eclipse Che, plug-ins are delivered with their own dependencies in their own container.
```

video::HbTKDlOL1eo[youtube]

=== Enterprise Integration

> Eclipse Che also includes link:https://www.keycloak.org[Keycloak] to handle authentication and security. It allows the integration with any SSO, as well as Active Directory or LDAP. Each users of Eclipse Che gets centralized developer which can be easily defined, administered and managed. Eclipse Che as a kubernetes native application provides state-of-the-art monitoring and tracing capabilities, integrating with link:https://prometheus.io/[Prometheus] and link:https://grafana.com/[Grafana]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Eclipse Che includes link:https://www.keycloak.org[Keycloak] to handle authentication and security. It allows for integration with any single sign-on (SSO), as well as with Active Directory or LDAP.

* Every Eclipse Che user gets a centralized developer workspace that can be easily defined, administered and managed.

* As a Kubernetes-native application, Eclipse Che provides state-of-the-art monitoring and tracing capabilities, integrating with link:https://prometheus.io/[Prometheus] and link:https://grafana.com/[Grafana]. 
```
